Submit your PR on this new repo Hacktoberfest , There we are merging all PR.

This is a beginner-friendly project to help you get started with your hacktoberfest. Happy hacking <3 💙 !!

Contribution Rules📚:

    You are allowed to make pull requests that break the rules. We just merge it ;)
    Do NOT add any build steps e.g npm install (we want to keep this a simple static site)
    Do NOT remove other content.
    Styling/code can be pretty, ugly or stupid, big or small as long as it works
    Add your name to the contributorsList file
    Try to keep pull requests small to minimize merge conflicts

Getting Started 🤩🤗:

    Fork this repo (button on top)
    Clone on your local machine

git clone https://github.com/fineanmol/Hacktoberfest2022.git

    Navigate to project directory.

cd Hacktoberfest2022

    Create a new Branch

git checkout -b my-new-branch

    Add your Name to contributors/contributorsList.js

git add .

    Commit your changes.

git commit -m "Relevant message"

    Then push

git push origin my-new-branch

    Create a new pull request from your forked repository


Avoid Conflicts {Syncing your fork}

An easy way to avoid conflicts is to add an 'upstream' for your git repo, as other PR's may be merged while you're working on your branch/fork.

git remote add upstream https://github.com/fineanmol/Hacktoberfest2022

You can verify that the new remote has been added by typing

git remote -v

To pull any new changes from your parent repo simply run

git merge upstream/master

This will give you any eventual conflicts and allow you to easily solve them in your repo. It's a good idea to use it frequently in between your own commits to make sure that your repo is up to date with its parent.

For more information on syncing forks read this article from Github.
Swags of Hacktoberfest:

    Many of the candidates get attracted towards hacktoberfest to get swags . So, after 4 successfully merged pull request as for 2021 you will be eligible to get a Hacktoberfest T-shirt and Some stickers on your doorstep.

    tshirt image

    stickers image

FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)

    Who all can contribute?
        Anyone with a github account and who is signed up for hacktoberfest :)

    Are you getting paid for this?
        Sadly no. But we think we should. This is 100% unofficial and we do it for fun, fame and glory.

    Who are you and why are you doing this?
        We are two programmers from India Anmol and Ritesh. We are doing this because we love Open Source and Hacktoberfest. We want to make it easier for people to get started with Hacktoberfest and Open Source.

    Why are you not using digitalocean?
        Because we only know JavaScript and suck at servers. We use now instead.

    Should I come closer to the text saying 'Don't come closer' on the left side of the home tab ?
        Nope.

    How many pull request (PR) must be made, if I want to get an awesome tshirt from Hacktoberfest 2022?
        4

    What is the duration of Hacktoberfest 2022?
        It is from 1st october to 31st october 2022...

    What is the event for?
        For the open source community engagement

We will do our best to merge as much as possible from everyone. However, time is limited and the merge conflicts are horrible 😲 <3

